= Maya Linear Workflow vs. Texture Gamma

:hp-tags: maya, vray, linear workflow, rendering

Linear workflow is the subjects of a lot of mysteries. Indeed, it is
convoluted an hard to understand especially if there are multiple ways
to achieve similar but not the same result. Linear workflow mean that
*all your images going trough the pipiline in linear color space.* For
example render output from Maya in linear space go to Nuke where get
processed and render to final delivery format in sRGB. In this article I
want to show my observation end experiments that I've done with V-Ray
and Maya and how at firs glance similar things  can produce quite
different result. The most important thing to know is that all of the
**renders perform calculation with linear colors**, thus all the sources
supplied, such as texture images, has to be linear. People often forget
that shaders also need to be supplied with linear images. Most of the
source files (.jpg, png, tif, etc.) used as textures have non-linear
gamma (2.2) applied to it. Majority of render engines perform texture
filtering in two places. First, when a shader process a texture, second,
when the render engine calculating the image (anti-aliasing). As a
matter of fact, we want to convert our images before shader start to
perform its calculations, otherwise when it come to applying filtering
the math will be wrong. When you select you gamma conversion in
application there are usually a couple choices sRGB and Gamma 2.2. This
color spaces have slightly different curve which probably will be
undistingvishble.  Here is an example of two overlapping curve taken
from Nuke LUT Settings.
image:https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/srgb_gamma2-2_difference1.png?w=300[sRGB_Gamma2.2_difference,width=594,height=530]
My test set up include two texture images. One texture used as is with
gamma 2.2 color space, another was converted to linear by using Nuke
Colorspace node.
https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/brick_2_2_gamma.jpg[image:https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/brick_2_2_gamma.jpg?w=300[brick_2_2_gamma,width=300,height=200]]
https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/brick_linear_gamma.jpg[image:https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/brick_linear_gamma.jpg?w=300[brick_linear_gamma,width=300,height=200]]
image:https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/nuke_2-2_to_linear.png?w=300[nuke_2.2_to_linear,width=615,height=400]
First I went and disabled all of the filtering on texture as well as in
render settings in order to get clean more predictable result. In term
of linear workflow I've been testing the following cases:

[cols=",,",]
|============================================================
| |*Input* |*Option*
|*Case 1* |Texture in gamma 2.2 |Linear Workflow Toggle On
|*Case 2* |Texture in gamma 2.2 |Vray Texture Input Gamma 2.2
|*Case 3* |Linear Texture |All off
|============================================================

Here is example with  Vray Texture Input Gamma 2.2.
https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/vray_extra_attribute.png[image:https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/vray_extra_attribute.png?w=300[vray_extra_attribute,width=685,height=179]]
This image show Linear Workflow Toggle On.
image:https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/vray_linear_workflow.png?w=300[vray_linear_workflow,width=687,height=464]
With linear workflow toggle ON you will get warning saying that _linear
workflow toggle was deprecated_ but documentation doesn't explain why, I
also tried to find information on  Chaos Group forum with no luck.

[[linear-workflow--this-option-is-deprecated-and-will-be-removed-in-future-versions-of-v-ray.-when-this-option-is-checked-v-ray-will-automatically-apply-the-inverse-of-the-gamma-correction-that-you-have-set-in-thegamma-field-to-allvraymtlmaterials-in-your-scene.note-this-option-is-intended-to-be-used-only-for-quickly-converting-old-scenes-which-are-not-set-up-with-proper-linear-workflow-in-mind.-this-option-is-not-a-replacement-for-proper-linear-workflow.-httpdocs.chaosgroup.comdisplayvray3colormapping]]
**Linear workflow **- this option is deprecated and will be removed in
future versions of V-Ray. When this option is checked V-Ray will
automatically apply the inverse of the Gamma correction that you have
set in the *Gamma* field to
all http://docs.chaosgroup.com/display/VRAY3/VRayMtl[VRayMtl] materials
in your scene. *Note:* this option is intended to be used only for
quickly converting old scenes which are not set up with proper linear
workflow in mind. This option is not a replacement for proper linear
workflow. http://docs.chaosgroup.com/display/VRAY3/Color+Mapping#

The following image demonstrate the difference between Linear Workflow
Toggle and on texture gamma correction. One main thing to note here that
image corrected with VRay Extra Attribute (Case 2) has now difference
with linear image without any correction (Case 3). On the other hand,
image witch rendered with linear workflow toggle on has noticeable
degradation in dark colors.
image:https://kiko3d.files.wordpress.com/2015/03/gamma_difference1.gif[gamma_difference,width=747,height=744]
Most likely degradation happening due to filtering process that
happening when texture get process by shader. By specifying texture
input gamma on shader VRay can interpret texture to linear work space
before doing the actual calculation. In case when linear workflow is
turned on in render settings the texture gets filtered with non-linear
gamma which lead to some errors in shader math and only after that
render convert the texture to linear work space and perform
further calculations.

[[resources]]
Resources
^^^^^^^^^

This article was inspired by the great tutorial from Alexey Mazurenko.
Unfortunately only available in Russian. https://vimeo.com/53806660
Fabulus paper from siggraph about RENDERMAN
http://old.siggraph.org/publications/2006cn/course25.pdf What Ri spec
newer told you
http://renderman.pixar.com/view/what-the-rispec-never-told-you
